docs/coding-practices/CCNA/lessons/lesson_3.md, before:

---
title: lesson_3
layout: default
parent: CCNA
grand_parent: Coding Practices
---
## Table of contents
{: .no_toc .text-delta }

1. TOC
{:toc}

---
3rd Lesson - CCNA Fast Track (May 20, 2025). We left off at page 43.

# 0. CCNA Exam Questions
1. How many default VLANs are in a normal switch ? 
> Ans: 5 (VLAN1, VLAN1002, VLAN1003, VLAN1004, VLAN1005), these cannot be deleted

2. What should one do when there are unused ports ? (2 steps)
> Ans: Those ports should be **shutdown** and assigned to an unused VLAN (we can create an unused VLAN). Else, cybersecurity risks.

3. During the CCNA practical exam, please **verify** after you **configure** !!  

# 4. Features in CISCO switches
## 4.3 Default VLAN

- Showing default vlan with `sh vlan`...
    - 
    ```bash
    VLAN    Name                Status      Ports
    -------------------------------------------------------------------------------
    1       default             active      Gi0/0, Gi0/1, Gi0/2, Gi0/3,
                                            Gi1/0, Gi1/1, Gi1/2, Gi1/3
    1002    fddi-default        act/unsup
    1003    token-ring-default  act/unsup
    1004    fddinet-default     act/unsup
    1005    trnet-default       act/unsup
    .
    .
    .
    ```
    - The 8 ports are all under VLAN 1.
    - The only usable VLAN is VLAN1 for now.

- VLAN has 2 different ranges:
    - VLAN 1-1005 = **Normal Range**
    - VLAN 1006-4094 = **Extended Range**

### 4.3.2 VLAN Configuration

- Practice: Creating VLAN 2 and assign g0/2 into VLAN 2!
    - Step 1: Create VLAN 2 on Switch 1 via `vlan 2` and takes you to VLAN COnfiguration mode and change name with `name Acounting`.
        - 
        ```bash
        en
        config t
        vlan 2
        name Accounting
        end
        ```
    - Step 2: Assign switch port g0/2 to VLAN2 via `int 0/2` = entering interface config mode and modify swtich port setting and assign it to VLAN 2 with `swtichport access vlan 2`.
        - 
        ```bash
        en
        config t
        int g0/2
        switchport access vlan 2
        end
        ```
    - Step 3: Verify with `sh vlan`! Done !
        - 
        ```bash
        VLAN    Name                Status      Ports
        -------------------------------------------------------------------------------
        1       default             active      Gi0/0, Gi0/1, Gi0/3,
                                                Gi1/0, Gi1/1, Gi1/2, Gi1/3
        2       Accounting          active      Gi0/2 <================================= NICEEEE
        1002    fddi-default        act/unsup   
        1003    token-ring-default  act/unsup
        1004    fddinet-default     act/unsup
        1005    trnet-default       act/unsup
        .
        .
        .
        ``` 

- Practice: Configuring multiple swtich ports? 
    - Ans: do these 2 things
        - Step 1: `int range g0/1-3` or `int range g0/1, g0/3`. These two expressions both works
        - Step 2: `switchport access vlan 2`


### 4.3.3 VLAN Trunk!! (VERY IMPORTANT!)
- Important:
    - VLAN Trunk is able to handle all VLAN and forward all VLAN traffic in one connection.
    - If VLAN Trunk doesn't exist... 1 new VLAN needs 1 new swtich port... # of cables will be unmanagable in the long run... Hence, use VLAN trunk!
    - Trunk ports will add VLAN info = VLAN tag to the forwarded data frame.
- When do we use a tag ?

Commit message:

feat(pg46): lesson3 with pics

docs/coding-practices/CCNA/lessons/lesson_3.md, after:

---
title: lesson_3
layout: default
parent: CCNA
grand_parent: Coding Practices
---
## Table of contents
{: .no_toc .text-delta }

1. TOC
{:toc}

---
3rd Lesson - CCNA Fast Track (May 20, 2025). We left off at page 43.

# 0. CCNA Exam Questions
1. How many default VLANs are in a normal switch ? 
> Ans: 5 (VLAN1, VLAN1002, VLAN1003, VLAN1004, VLAN1005), these cannot be deleted

2. What should one do when there are unused ports ? (2 steps)
> Ans: Those ports should be **shutdown** and assigned to an unused VLAN (we can create an unused VLAN). Else, cybersecurity risks.

3. During the CCNA practical exam, please **verify** after you **configure** !!  

4. MC will ask about Native VLAN mismatch, how do we tackle this issue?
> Ans: 2 answers, both works. Either **merge** (left and right native VLAN merges) or **spanning-tree block** blocking both VLANs together!

# 4. Features in CISCO switches
## 4.3 Default VLAN

- Showing default vlan with `sh vlan`...
    - 
    ```bash
    VLAN    Name                Status      Ports
    -------------------------------------------------------------------------------
    1       default             active      Gi0/0, Gi0/1, Gi0/2, Gi0/3,
                                            Gi1/0, Gi1/1, Gi1/2, Gi1/3
    1002    fddi-default        act/unsup
    1003    token-ring-default  act/unsup
    1004    fddinet-default     act/unsup
    1005    trnet-default       act/unsup
    .
    .
    .
    ```
    - The 8 ports are all under VLAN 1.
    - The only usable VLAN is VLAN1 for now.

- VLAN has 2 different ranges:
    - VLAN 1-1005 = **Normal Range**
    - VLAN 1006-4094 = **Extended Range**

### 4.3.2 VLAN Configuration

- Practice: Creating VLAN 2 and assign g0/2 into VLAN 2!
    - Step 1: Create VLAN 2 on Switch 1 via `vlan 2` and takes you to VLAN COnfiguration mode and change name with `name Acounting`.
        - 
        ```bash
        en
        config t
        vlan 2
        name Accounting
        end
        ```
    - Step 2: Assign switch port g0/2 to VLAN2 via `int 0/2` = entering interface config mode and modify swtich port setting and assign it to VLAN 2 with `swtichport access vlan 2`.
        - 
        ```bash
        en
        config t
        int g0/2
        switchport access vlan 2
        end
        ```
    - Step 3: Verify with `sh vlan`! Done !
        - 
        ```bash
        VLAN    Name                Status      Ports
        -------------------------------------------------------------------------------
        1       default             active      Gi0/0, Gi0/1, Gi0/3,
                                                Gi1/0, Gi1/1, Gi1/2, Gi1/3
        2       Accounting          active      Gi0/2 <================================= NICEEEE
        1002    fddi-default        act/unsup   
        1003    token-ring-default  act/unsup
        1004    fddinet-default     act/unsup
        1005    trnet-default       act/unsup
        .
        .
        .
        ``` 

- Practice: Configuring multiple swtich ports? 
    - Ans: do these 2 things
        - Step 1: `int range g0/1-3` or `int range g0/1, g0/3`. These two expressions both works
        - Step 2: `switchport access vlan 2`


### 4.3.3 VLAN Trunk!! (VERY IMPORTANT!)
- Important:
    - VLAN Trunk can handle + forward all VLAN frames and all VLAN traffic through one single connection.
    - If VLAN Trunk doesn't exist... 1 new VLAN needs 1 new swtich port... # of cables will be unmanagable in the long run... Hence, use **VLAN trunk**!
    - Trunk ports will add VLAN info = VLAN tag to the forwarded data frame.
- When do we use a tag ? Ans: all non-native VLANs's data frame will be tagged!

- **Native VLAN**, default is VLAN 1. However, native VLAN can be set by speicifying a VLAN ID during trunk port configurations.
    - Adding VLAN information to data frames is under this protocol: **IEEE 802.1Q** or **802.1q encapsulation** (dot 1 Q)
    - Please note! MUST configure the same native VLAN for the trunk ports for both sides of the connection!!! Otherwise, Native VLAN Mismatch !!!
    - Refer to this diagram for an example for VLAN
    - ![](../../../../../assets/images/ccna/lesson3/lesson_3_vlan_1.jpg) 

- Native VLAN mismatch:
- You'll see this on the log...
    - Meaning VLAN 8 and VLAN 99 are clashing since they're both configured as Native VLAN in their own respective trunks!
    ```bash
    Switch1#
    %CDP-4-NATIVE_VLAN_MISMATCH: Native VLAN mismatch discovered on GigabitEthernet1/2 (8), with Switch2 GigabitEthernet1/2 (99).
    ```
    - Diagram of the VLAN mismatch
        - ![](../../../../../assets/images/ccna/lesson3/lesson_3_vlan_2.jpg)
