docs/coding-practices/CICD/child/Terraform.md, before:

---
title: Terraform
layout: default
parent: CICD
grand_parent: Coding Practices
has_children: true
---
# Basic Terminologies
1. OCS: VM instance created on private cloud based on Openstack (self-managed)
2. VCS: VM instance created on private cloud based on VMWare (Global Tech Service team managed)
    - IMAGE: OS template (e.g. CentOS, Red Hat OS)
    - FLAVOR: Size of Ram, CPU and Disk storage
    - KEYPAIR: SSH key-pair
    - SECURITY GROUPS: referring to firewall rules
    - NETWORK (zone): the zone the instance is in (e.g. hk-hongkong-1, hk-hongkong-2)
3. Cloud Platform XaaS: Anything as a Service (An Unitary infra.) - including OCS and VCS
4. IaC: Infra as Code - referring to ansible and terraform
    - Ansible: Config management, software installation... = deployment automation = managing application and env at scale
        - Pros:
            - Agentless: works via ssh, no need to install agent on target VM
            - Declarative language: using yaml to write structured playbooks to describe auto tasks
            - Config management: via playbook
            - easy to use
            - uniformity: consistent config across uat, dev and prod env
            - centralization: centralizing config management and simplifying node syncs
            - process automation: coordinating complex tasks between servers (i.e. cronjobs)
            - consistent execution: 
    - Terraform: Provisioning infra from data center (i.e. VM) = an open source tool by HashiCorp

# Setting up VCS terraform & ansible


# Setting up OCS w/ terraform & ansible
1. in project, create new .yml workflow under .github.workflows
2.

Commit message:

feat: added new docs: terraform, github action, cicd helm, coding interviews

docs/coding-practices/CICD/child/Terraform.md, after:

---
title: Terraform
layout: default
parent: CICD
grand_parent: Coding Practices
has_children: true
---
# Terraform
Background:
    - IaC: Infra as Code - referring to ansible and terraform

## Common Commands for Terraform CLI
1. `terraform init` - initialize terraform in the working directory
2. `terraform plan` - preview changes to be applied
3. `terraform apply` - apply changes to the infra
4. `terraform destroy` - destroy the infra managed by terraform

## Example Workflow for spinning up EC2 instance on AWS using Terraform
1. Create a new directory for your terraform project (e.g. BACKEND)
2. Inside the directory, create a main.tf file and add your terraform configuration code. Place it under `terraform/aws/` directory for reference.
3. Create a new .yaml workflow file under .github/workflows (e.g. terraform-deploy.yml)
4. Create a new .yaml workflow file under .github/workflows (e.g. terraform-deploy.yml)

# Old Stuff

## Basic Terminologies
1. OCS: VM instance created on private cloud based on Openstack (self-managed)
2. VCS: VM instance created on private cloud based on VMWare (Global Tech Service team managed)
    - IMAGE: OS template (e.g. CentOS, Red Hat OS)
    - FLAVOR: Size of Ram, CPU and Disk storage
    - KEYPAIR: SSH key-pair
    - SECURITY GROUPS: referring to firewall rules
    - NETWORK (zone): the zone the instance is in (e.g. hk-hongkong-1, hk-hongkong-2)
3. Cloud Platform XaaS: Anything as a Service (An Unitary infra.) - including OCS and VCS
4. IaC: Infra as Code - referring to ansible and terraform
    - Ansible: Config management, software installation... = deployment automation = managing application and env at scale
        - Pros:
            - Agentless: works via ssh, no need to install agent on target VM
            - Declarative language: using yaml to write structured playbooks to describe auto tasks
            - Config management: via playbook
            - easy to use
            - uniformity: consistent config across uat, dev and prod env
            - centralization: centralizing config management and simplifying node syncs
            - process automation: coordinating complex tasks between servers (i.e. cronjobs)
            - consistent execution: 
    - Terraform: Provisioning infra from data center (i.e. VM) = an open source tool by HashiCorp

## Setting up VCS terraform & ansible


## Setting up OCS w/ terraform & ansible
1. in project, create new .yml workflow under .github.workflows
2.
